About The Authors
==================

**Larry Peterson** is the Robert E. Kahn Professor of Computer
Science, Emeritus at Princeton University, where he served as Chair
from 2003-2009. His research focuses on the design, implementation,
and operation of Internet-scale distributed systems, including the
widely used PlanetLab and MeasurementLab platforms.  He is currently
contributing to the Aether access-edge cloud project at the Open
Networking Foundation (ONF), where he serves as Chief Scientist.
Peterson is a member of the National Academy of Engineering, a Fellow
of the ACM and the IEEE, the 2010 recipient of the IEEE Kobayashi
Computer and Communication Award, and the 2013 recipient of the ACM
SIGCOMM Award. He received his Ph.D. degree from Purdue University.

**Lawrence Brakmo** currently works in the Kernel group at Facebook.
Prior to joining Facebook, he was a member of the Host Networking
group at Google, and before that, a researcher and project manager of
the OS group at DoCoMo USA Labs. Brakmo has worked on TCP enhancements
to improve network performance, including the design of the TCP Vegas
and TCP-NV congestion control algorithms. He has also developed OS
techniques to improve system reliability, performance, and energy
consumption. Brakmo received his Ph.D. degree in Computer Science from
The University of Arizona.

**Bruce Davie** is a computer scientist noted for his contributions to
the field of networking. He is a former VP and CTO for the Asia
Pacific region at VMware. He joined VMware during the acquisition of
Software Defined Networking (SDN) startup Nicira. Prior to that, he
was a Fellow at Cisco Systems, leading a team of architects
responsible for Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS). Davie has over
30 years of networking industry experience and has co-authored 17
RFCs. He was recognized as an ACM Fellow in 2009 and chaired ACM
SIGCOMM from 2009 to 2013. He was also a visiting lecturer at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology for five years. Davie is the
author of multiple books and the holder of more than 40 U.S. Patents.

